---
layout: post
title: "愛×AI傘 - Forward"
quote: "A series for"
---

#Forward

The following series of blog posts/stories attempt to teach some of the fundamentals of machine learning
through discourse, while still maintaining and providing the sufficient mathematics which are required to
understand the underlying principles of Machine Learning. It is assumed that by minimum the reader has had
some exposure to Calculus and Statistics, but don't worry as I will attempt to break down everything into
smaller pieces. So even if you have no idea of what the mathematics of Machine Learning entails, I attempt
to use as analogy and metaphors as possible to help describe the process of the algorithms and approaches
used in Machine Learning. Furthermore, I hope to also mix in some of the fundamental elements of epistemology
as well as some of my own personal experiences into the story, to be able to better paint a picture of
what Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence is.

Telling stories have been an innate which capability humans have taken part, even today.
According to Patrick Winston, a Computer Science Professor at MIT which I was fortunate enough to meet,
he articulates the importance of how the understanding of story telling has contributed to much of the
intelligence capabilities of humans. And it is by no surprise by the amount that we can learn so much
through stories, and we still use them today to teach life lessons, and even mathematics by one of my
favorite novelists of the Math Girls (数学ガール) series , Hiroshi Yuki.

This is yet another experiment with something I may or may not continue. This is really depending on
 whether I find this as an initiative of simplifying the jargon and mathematics of machine learning
to make it easier (if at all possile), accessible and appealing to a wider audience of people. I
myself have never been a very good writer, which may lead to some difficulty in the process and
stumps along the road. A lot of the work and ideas of this initiative has been inspired from the
writing style of Hiroshi, which makes use of teaching concepts through dialog - similarly to how
Greek philosophers such as Plato. I believe that through discourse, there are certain elements and
distinctive dynamism which allows for a certain level of flexibility in how content is presented to
an audience in contrast to technical writing. I am truly hoping that these succession of blog posts will
accomplish just that.

<hr>
